doc/playbook.md, before:

# Playbook for Operators

> This document assumes that you have already read and understood the [general
> README](../README.md). If not, start reading there.

This document contains instruction on how to deal with _absence alerts_.

## Disable the operator

> **Note**: make sure that you use `"true"` and not `true` as the value for labels
> mentioned below.

### Specific alert rule

If you want to disable the operator for only a specific alert rule then you can add the
`no_alert_on_absence` label to a specific alert rule.

Example:

```yaml
alert: ImportantAlert
expr: foo_bar > 0
for: 5m
labels:
  no_alert_on_absence: "true"
  ...
```

### Entire `PrometheusRule`

You can disable the operator for a specific `PrometheusRule` resource by adding the
following label to it:

```yaml
absent-metrics-operator/disable: "true"
```

### Caveat

If you disable the operator for a specific alert or a specific
`PrometheusRule` resource but there are other alerts or `PrometheusRule` resources which
have alert definitions that use the same metrics then the _absent alert
rules_ for those metrics will be created regardless.

For example, considering the following rule definitions:

```yaml
- alert: ImportantAlert
  expr: foo_bar > 0
  for: 5m
  labels:
    no_alert_on_absence: "true"
    ...

- alert: ImportantServiceAlert
  expr: max(foo_bar) BY (service, region) > 0
  for: 5m
  labels:
    ...
```

An _absence alert rule_ for the `foo_bar` metric will be created because it is used in
`ImportantServiceAlert` even though `ImportantAlert` specifies the `no_alert_on_absence`
label.

## Tier and service labels

`tier` and `service` labels are a special case. We (SAP Converged Cloud) use them for
posting alert notifications to different Slack channels.

These labels are defined using different strategies in the following order
(highest to lowest priority):

1. Alert rule labels: if the alert rule has the `tier` **OR** `service` label and the
   label doesn't use templating (e.g. `$labels.some_label`) then carry over that label as
   is.
2. Resource level labels: If the `tier` **OR** `service` labels are defined at the
   resource (i.e. `PrometheusRule`) level then use their values.
3. Most common tier service: find a default value for the `tier` and `service` labels by
   traversing through all the alert rule definitions for a specific Prometheus server in a
   specific namespace. The `tier` **AND** `service` label combination that is the most
   common amongst all those alerts will be used as the default.

If all of the above strategies fail, i.e. a value for `tier` and `service` cannot be
determined, then the _absence alert rules_ won't have these labels.

**Tip**: add `tier` and `service` labels to your `PrometheusRule` resource. These values
will be used as defaults in case your alert rule definition is missing these labels or if
templating is used. This will ensure that the alert notifications for _absence alerts_
will land in the appropriate Slack channel.

Commit message:

Fix finding defaults for CCloud labels

doc/playbook.md, after:

# Playbook for Operators

> This document assumes that you have already read and understood the [general
> README](../README.md). If not, start reading there.

This document contains instruction on how to deal with _absence alerts_.

## Disable the operator

> **Note**: make sure that you use `"true"` and not `true` as the value for labels
> mentioned below.

### Specific alert rule

If you want to disable the operator for only a specific alert rule then you can add the
`no_alert_on_absence` label to a specific alert rule.

Example:

```yaml
alert: ImportantAlert
expr: foo_bar > 0
for: 5m
labels:
  no_alert_on_absence: "true"
  ...
```

### Entire `PrometheusRule`

You can disable the operator for a specific `PrometheusRule` resource by adding the
following label to it:

```yaml
absent-metrics-operator/disable: "true"
```

### Caveat

If you disable the operator for a specific alert or a specific
`PrometheusRule` resource but there are other alerts or `PrometheusRule` resources which
have alert definitions that use the same metrics then the _absent alert
rules_ for those metrics will be created regardless.

For example, considering the following rule definitions:

```yaml
- alert: ImportantAlert
  expr: foo_bar > 0
  for: 5m
  labels:
    no_alert_on_absence: "true"
    ...

- alert: ImportantServiceAlert
  expr: max(foo_bar) BY (service, region) > 0
  for: 5m
  labels:
    ...
```

An _absence alert rule_ for the `foo_bar` metric will be created because it is used in
`ImportantServiceAlert` even though `ImportantAlert` specifies the `no_alert_on_absence`
label.

## Support group and service labels

`support_group` and `service` labels are a special case. We (SAP Converged Cloud) use them for
routing alert notifications to different channels.

These labels are defined using different strategies in the following order
(highest to lowest priority):

1. Alert rule labels: if the alert rule has the `support_group` **OR** `service` label and the
   label doesn't use templating (e.g. `$labels.some_label`) then carry over that label as
   is.
2. K8s object level labels: If the `support_group` **OR** `service` labels are defined at the
   object (i.e. `PrometheusRule`) level then use their values.
3. Most common `support_group`/`service` combination: find a default value for the
   `support_group` and `service` labels by traversing through all the alert rules defined
   in the `PrometheusRule` object. The `support_group` **AND** `service` label combination
   that is the most common amongst all those alerts will be used as the default.
4. Most common `support_group`/`service` combination across the namespace: traverse
   through all the alert rule definitions for the concerning Prometheus server in the
   concerning namespace. The `support_group` **AND** `service` label combination that is
   the most common amongst all those alerts will be used as the default.

If all of the above strategies fail, i.e. a value for `support_group` and `service` cannot
be determined, then the _absence alert rules_ won't have these labels.

**Tip**: add `ccloud/support-group` and `ccloud/service` labels to your `PrometheusRule`
objects. These values will be used as defaults in case your alert rule definitions are
missing these labels or if templating is used. This will ensure that the alert
notifications for _absence alerts_ will be routed to the correct channels.
